Introducing the Benchmark CPR:

Since we issued our first Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) in 1981, Fannie Mae has been meeting the nation’s mortgage liquidity needs by offering a security that is attractive to investors because of its dependable cash flows. To achieve this, Fannie Mae sets standards and actively reviews market practices that best contribute to reliable prepayment speeds. The recent launch of the Uniform Mortgage-Backed Security (UMBS®) has introduced an additional requirement for prepayment alignment between Fannie Mae’s and Freddie Mac’s1 securities. As part of our continuous efforts to manage prepayment speeds more effectively, Fannie Mae developed our Benchmark CPR framework to facilitate proactive engagement with sellers and servicers. By its nature, this framework is flexible, allowing Fannie Mae to adapt to changing market conditions. For Fannie Mae to manage our Single-Family business in a safe and sound manner, it is essential to have a unified metric that monitors entity-level prepayment speeds in relation to the cohort. Since late 2019, sellers and servicers have been able to track their own performance according to the Benchmark CPR framework — as well as that of other Fannie Mae sellers and servicers — on our seller/servicer reporting portal. The introduction of one consistent metric has resulted in simplified engagement with Fannie Mae as it relates to prepayment speeds. This has helped align expectations and mitigate confusion that could otherwise occur when referencing multiple metrics. We are making our Benchmark CPR surveillance framework available to all market participants by launching
the Benchmark CPR dashboard on Data Dynamics®, our free online analytics platform. Fannie Mae believes that transparency reinforces our ability to promote behavior that contributes to the liquidity and vitality of the MBS market. The Benchmark CPR dashboard allows all market participants including investors, sellers, and servicers to monitor prepayment speeds through the same lens as Fannie Mae, which we hope will align expectations and enhance confidence in cashflow predictability. Fannie Mae uses public monthly prepayment data to calculate the Benchmark CPR, enabling market participants to replicate the methodology and results. Our Benchmark CPR framework builds upon the familiar market concept of the Conditional Prepayment Rate (CPR) by defining the reference population using a 24-month rolling issuance window rather than a vintage cohort. There are several limitations with existing prepayment metrics used by market participants that this methodology seeks to address: 
• Cohort by vintage: One of the most common practices is to cohort by vintage. By construction, the population of loans included in the most recent vintage cohort grows over the course of that year, resulting in inconsistent month-over-month comparisons. Prepayment trends may span more than one vintage, so a year-end cutoff in the population may produce a distorted view of prepayment when viewed in isolation.
• Servicing transfers: Existing prepayment methodologies have not universally incorporated servicing transfers into the
calculations, which could distort the prepayment speeds of a servicer during a month of servicing sales or acquisitions.
Our solution is designed to address each of these limitations and to enable more proactive engagement with our seller
and servicer partners regarding their business practices.



Defining the Benchmark CPR:

The Benchmark CPR is calculated from the weighted average of one-month single monthly mortality (SMM) rates
for a reference population of loans defined by a 24-month rolling issuance window. Our flagship metric is the Benchmark CPR3, which is calculated from the three-month weighted average SMM. The number of months covered by each issuance window is always fixed (in this case, at 24 months). As a result, the weighted average seasoning of the reference population for every Benchmark CPR observation is generally stable. All loans in each issuance window that contributes to the BCPR3 are at least two months seasoned at the beginning of each observation period, allowing us to capture speeds further up the seasoning ramp. Requiring at least two months of seasoning ensures that each loan has at least three prepayment opportunities captured in the Benchmark CPR metric.

Prepayments for each observation month are attributed to the servicer of record at the beginning of that observation month, ensuring that transfers of servicing are consistently accounted for. Similarly, loans in the reference population are attributed to the servicing seller at the time of pooling. Finally, as note rate differences among sellers and servicers may impact relative prepayment performance, we normalize the cohort’s profile to each entity. To make this adjustment, we reweight the cohort’s SMMs by note rate to match the entity’s note rate distribution and recalculate the entity’s percentage of cohort, which we refer to as the note rate-adjusted Benchmark CPR ratio.



Benchmarking to Cohort using Benchmark CPR Ratio

we compute the ratio of the SMM3 for each seller and servicer to the SMM3 of the overall cohort — controlling for GSE — to produce a transparent indicator of prepayment speed alignment. We call this the Benchmark CPR ratio. A Benchmark CPR ratio close to 100 percent indicates that the entity’s portfolio is prepaying
in line with the cohort, while a Benchmark CPR ratio significantly greater than 100 percent signals that the entity’s portfolio is prepaying faster than the cohort. In addition, applying a note-rate adjustment may be appropriate to better capture the distribution of note rates for the entity’s portfolio. Finally, we display both the seller and servicer for each entity to properly attribute performance trends to the responsible entity. For example, for a seller that transfers
most of its servicing, it may be more appropriate to focus on the speeds of the seller entity for a more representative measure of its prepayment behavior.
The resulting ratios from the Benchmark CPR calculation better enable Fannie Mae to deploy its strategy for engaging with sellers and servicers to manage prepayment speeds. We believe that early, proactive engagement with our seller and servicer partners about their prepayment behavior is the most effective way of promoting stability of prepayment performance. Addressing the root cause of prepayment deviations puts in place a long-term foundation for a productive partnership that benefits all stakeholders. Market participants should be aware of the remedies that Fannie Mae may employ when appropriate, including, but not limited to: extending premium recapture, limiting acquisition of servicing rights, adjusting buy-up/buy-down pricing, imposing delivery limits, and seller suspension.



Summary

As the leading provider of liquidity to the housing finance system, Fannie Mae must balance the interests of stakeholders, including borrowers, sellers, servicers, and investors. In order to support this objective, we developed the Benchmark CPR framework, providing sellers and servicers with clear insight into how Fannie Mae is assessing their relative prepayment behavior. With the launch of the Benchmark CPR dashboard in Data Dynamics, we hope to give investors transparency into the metrics that help Fannie Mae promote reliable cashflows on our securities. By its nature, the Benchmark CPR framework is flexible and may be adapted to prevailing market conditions in order for Fannie Mae to achieve this objective. Preserving the vibrancy of the TBA market is critical to maintaining the liquidity of
the nation’s housing finance system and lowering borrowing costs for American homeowners.