Government Sponsored Entity = Abbreviated as GSE, either Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae. Indicates ownership of the UPB values associated with a given seller/servicer.

Activity Month = The month for which the associated values in the data are current.

Entity Type = Seller or Servicer, which type of relationship an entity has with a given GSE.

Entity Name = Name of Seller or Servicer as indicated by the Entity Type.

Current Balance = Also called CURRBAL, the current outstanding principal amount for a given entity.

Average Origination Loan Size = Abbreviated as AVGOLS, indicates the average loan size in dollars for a cohort at the time of origination.

Weighted Average Coupon = Abbreviated as WAC, the average coupon rate of the underlying loans in a cohort, weighted by current unpaid principal balance.

Weighted Average Loan Age = Abbreviated as WALA, indicates how seasoned the underlying loans in a cohort are, weighted by current unpaid principal balance.

Weighted Average FICO Score= Weighted average credit score for a cohort, weighted by current unpaid principal balance.

Weighted Average Loan-to-Value Ratio = Abbreviated as LTV, indicates the average ratio of the current unpaid principal amount to the property value at origination, weighted by current unpaid principal balance.

Weighted Average Debt-to-Income Ratio = Abbreviated as DTI, indicates the ratio of borrower debt to monthly income at origination, weighted by current unpaid principal balance.

Benchmark Conditional Prepayment Rate (3-month) = Abbreviated as BCPR3, it is calculated from the weighted average of one-month single monthly mortality (SMM) rates for a reference population of loans defined by a 24-month rolling issuance window.

BCPR Percent Cohort = Abbreviated as BCPRPCTCOH, the CPR of a given entity relative to its corresponding cohort. Above 100 indicates a faster prepay than the cohort standard.

Note Rate Adjusted BCPR = Abbreviated as BCPRADJ, this is the BCPR adjusted for the note rate of the underlying cohort.

Product = The type of mortgage product, either 30 year fixed rate (FRM30) or 15 year fixed rate (FRM15).

BPS = Basis points basis points are percentages represented as a whole number. 1 basis point is equivalent to 0.01%.


Average Origination Loan Size (AVG OLS), Weighted Average Coupon (WAC), Weighted Average Loan Age (WALA, also referred to as seasoning when values are higher), Weighted Average Loan-to-Vlaue Ratio (WALTV, LTV), Weighted Average FICO, (WAFICO, FICO), Weighted Average Debt-to-Income (WADTI, DTI) are all profile risk metrics of the underlying mortgage collateral that can drive differences in BCPRs across different populations.

Another thing that can affect prepayment is the number of business days in a month where mortgage payment collection is possible.  Holidays and length of the month can affect the available collection window.